Add resource management alerts (#82)
appuio/component-openshift4-monitoring: docs/modules/ROOT/pages/runbooks/cpucapacity.adoc

= Alert Group: syn-CpuCapacity

We provide two rules to notice if a cluster has high CPU utilization.
If a cluster has consistently high CPU utilization workload latency might increase and operations might timeout.

== Alert Rule: SYN_ClusterCpuUsageHigh [[SYN_ClusterCpuUsageHigh]]

=== icon:glasses[] Overview

This alert means that the total CPU utilization over all worker nodes is high.
By default it will fire if the number of idle cores is less than the core count of the largest worker node for more than two hours.

This means if you receive this alert in case of a woker node failure the cluster will likely experience high latency.
After verifying the alert you should consider adding more CPU capacity.

=== icon:search[] Investigate

* Verify the alert
** Verify that the reported load is correct.
+
[source,shell]
----
kubectl top nodes
----
+

> If not there might be a bug in the alert rule.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the load reported by `top nodes` doesn't appear to be particularly high, there might be a bug in the alert rule.
```

Please disable this alert and open an issue for this component.
** Check if there is a sudden increase in CPU usage that indicate that this might be temporary or caused by a misbehaving workload.
* Either add more worker nodes or resize existing worker nodes according to the install https://kb.vshn.ch/oc4/index.html[instructions for your cloud]

=== icon:wrench[] Tune

If this alert is non actionable, noisy, or was raised too late you might want to tune it.

Through the component parameters you have the option modify the alert threshold, change for how long it needs to be firing until you are alerted, or disable it outright.
In the example below will adapt the rule to only alert after four hours and change the threshold to 4 cores.

[source,yaml]
----
capacityAlerts:
  groups:
    CpuCapacity:
      rules:
        ClusterCpuUsageHigh:
          enabled: true
          for: 4h
          expr:
            threshold: '4' <1>
----
<1> The threshold can be an arbitrary promql expression

== Alert Rule: SYN_ExpectClusterCpuUsageHigh [[SYN_ExpectClusterCpuUsageHigh]]

=== icon:glasses[] Overview

> This alert means that we expect the total CPU utilization over all worker nodes might soon be high.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This alert indicates that we expect the total CPU utilization over all worker nodes to become high in the next days.
```

> By default this alert will fire if we expect the number of idle cores to less than the core count of the largest worker node in three days.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
By default, this alert will fire if we expect the number of idle cores to less than the core count of the largest worker node in three days.
```

> This means if you receive this alert the cluster might soon experience degraded workload performance in case of a worker node failure.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If you receive this alert, the cluster might soon experience degraded workload performance in case of a worker node failure.
```
